MongoDB : NoSQL

SQL : Tables , Rows

NOSQL : Collection , Documents

Core Concepts:

BSON (Binary JSON):
MongoDB stores data in BSON format. Think of BSON as a way to represent data in a binary-encoded form, much like how JSON represents data in a text-based format. It's used by MongoDB to efficiently store and retrieve data.

Collections:
Collections are like containers or folders in which MongoDB stores related documents. You can think of them as similar to tables in a traditional SQL database, but with a more flexible structure.

Documents:
Documents are the basic unit of data in MongoDB. They're similar to rows or records in a table, but unlike SQL databases where each row follows a fixed schema, MongoDB documents can have varying structures within the same collection.

Ecommerce

Collection : products

Documents: Product Information

Each document represents a specific product and can have different fields based on the product type.

{
"_id": ObjectId("61e65529b6fc4670e05a1c7a"),
"name": "Smartphone",
"brand": "XYZ",
"price": 699,
"specs": {
"display": "6.5 inches",
"storage": "128GB",
"camera": "Quad-camera setup"
}
}

{
"_id": ObjectId("61e65545b6fc4670e05a1c7b"),
"name": "Laptop",
"brand": "ABC",
"price": 1299,
"specs": {
"display": "15.6 inches",
"storage": "512GB SSD",
"RAM": "16GB",
"processor": "Intel Core i7"
}
}

MongoDB is a DB

ODMs SQL DBS (Object-Relation Mapping)
ORM for NoSQL DBs (Object-Document Mapping)




NodeJS ->  RelationDB 

SQL 


NodeJS (JS) -> Relational DB (SQL)

const query = "Select * from products where product.product_id = 1";
const result = DBClient.fire(query);

 Server         ORM/ODM          DB 



 Nodejs/Expres   Mongoose       MongoDB





 MVC Architecture 


 Models  : Represents the schema , data ..etc of the apllications
 Views/Route : Represents the user interface or what the user interacts with.
 Controllers : Acts as an intermediary between the model and the view.

 Benifits of MVC architecture
Separation of Concerns:
Divides the application into Model, View, and Controller for clear separation of responsibilities.

Modular Development:
Supports development and maintenance of separate, reusable modules for each component.

Improved Code Reusability:
Allows reuse of Models, Views, and Controllers in different parts of the application or other projects.

Enhanced Maintainability:
Changes in one component have minimal impact on the others, simplifying maintenance and debugging.

Scalability:
Facilitates parallel development and the addition of new features without major rework.

User Interface Flexibility:
Adapts to various user interfaces while keeping the core logic intact.

Efficient Testing and Debugging:
Enables isolated unit testing for each component, easing issue identification and resolution.

Parallel Development:
Supports multiple developers or teams working on different components simultaneously.

Support for Multiple Views:
Utilizes the same Model and Controller with multiple Views for diverse user interfaces.

Long-Term Maintainability:
Promotes organized and understandable code, reducing technical debt over time.